Add process for election of Rust Foundation Project Directors (#12)
rust-lang/leadership-council: policies/project-director-election-process.md

# Project Director Election Process

## Aims

The purpose of this policy is to outline a clear and efficient process for electing new Project Directors to represent the Rust project on the board of the Rust Foundation. The process aims to achieve the following goals:

> * Select candidates who fulfill the outlined candidate criteria, focusing on shared power and new leadership rather than solely prioritizing the best candidate.

Reviewer: Do we have an "outlined candidate criteria"? I would have expected a section entitled "candidate criteria" that lists what a "good" candidate for this role would be.

Reviewer: The use of the word "outlined" makes it explicit that the criteria is written and should be explicitly referred to. I think we should leave that as ambiguous as which criteria we're referring to. If we want that criteria to live in the role description document we should say that: 

> * Select candidates who fulfill the outlined candidate criteria in the [role description document](TODO: link), focusing on shared power and new leadership rather than solely prioritizing the best candidate.

Author: ```suggestion
* Select candidates who fulfill the outlined candidate criteria in the [role description document](TODO: link), focusing on shared power and new leadership rather than solely prioritizing the best candidate.
```

>     * Strive for tolerance and inclusivity, aiming for the overlap of tolerance rather than the overlap of preference.

Reviewer: This reads a bit jargony. If one has not heard the phrase "overlap of tolerance" or "overlap of preference" this sentence might be very hard to understand. Can we phrase this in a way that is clearer even if it requires being more verbose?

Reviewer 2: I'll second this. I almost made a similar comment on my review but couldn't think of terminology I liked better. Tolerance in particular struck me as being used in a technical sense that doesn't really match how I usually think of it in normal conversation. I think the thing that tolerance is meant to convey here is that we want to stress finding a solution everyone can live (i.e. tolerate) with over getting anyone's first choice (preference).

Maybe just a clarifying sentence explaining what we mean would help, like this?

```suggestion
    * Strive for tolerance and inclusivity, aiming for the overlap of tolerance rather than the overlap of preference. In other words, we want to prioritize a selection that everyone can accept over selecting anyone's first choice.
```

* Conduct the selection process in a time-efficient manner.
* Incorporate input from a wide range of stakeholders across the entire Rust project.
* Ensure a diverse pool of qualified candidates for selection.
* Create a psychologically safe environment that values minority perspectives and encourages positive feedback, encouragement, and tolerance rather than preference or criticism.

> * Ensure participants feel positive about their interactions and the execution of the process.

Reviewer: @abibroom's point about the requirement for compliance with the law makes me think we should put that as an aim here. I think most people in the project are not aware that there are legal requirements, and I think it's good to take this currently implicit requirement and make it explicit. 

> Ensure the process is compliant with Rust Foundation bylaws and by extension Delaware corporation law

Author: ```suggestion
* Ensure participants feel positive about their interactions and the execution of the process.
* Ensure the process is compliant with Rust Foundation bylaws and by extension Delaware corporation law.
```

## Description

### Setup

> * The council selects a facilitator by consent:

Reviewer 2: It sounds to me like the facilitator would be someone on the council who's responsible for executing this process (which I guess is obvious since the Aims of the facilitator role basically say this). But a lot of the role description sounds like what we've delegated to the Project Director Elections Subcommittee (or working group, or whatever term we use for this group). Is the idea that the Facilitator would be the interface point between the council and the subcommittee, but most of the facilitation work would continue to be done by the subcommittee?

Author: I think in this first iteration, where we're using a committee to draft the proposal, there's some overlap, but generally, I believe that concentrating the responsibility to push for action on the selection process will be most effective if it's assigned to a single person as a role, rather than as a group where I worry about the diffusion of responsibility. I prefer to have the committee mostly take the backseat even on this first selection once the proposal has been accepted and a facilitator selected, we may even want to add the facilitator that is selected to the committee if they're not already a member. Then we'd be responsible for ensuring they and the rest of the process are effective, but ideally, there's relatively little for us to do.

Reviewer 2: Ah, good point about future project director selection rounds. You're right, hopefully our subcommittee won't still exist then, so we wouldn't be around to support the process as a group. I do feel like helping to run the process falls under the "support its execution" goal from our charter, but that makes more sense as a quirk of the first time running the process rather than something we need to codify in the process document itself.

I don't think this comment warrants any change to the document, so I'll mark this comment as resolved.

    * Any team member can suggest a facilitator or volunteer themselves.
    * The facilitator must not be a nominee in the election and must be someone everyone trusts to set aside personal preferences during the election process.
    * **Aims of the facilitator role**
        * Clearly documenting and communicating the process and announcing and supporting its execution.
        * Tracking, reviewing, and documenting the effectiveness of the process.

> * Review or Define Role Description ([example](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3392#issuecomment-1505697944))

Reviewer 3: This exists, so please don't put huge amounts of time into writing one from scratch :)

Author: Fantastic, could you send me a link to the existing role description?

Reviewer 3: You should have a googledoc share notification now!

> * Review or Define Role Description ([example](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3392#issuecomment-1505697944))

Reviewer 2: I think it makes sense to emphasize the "Review" aspect of this point. I suspect we want the role to be well defined before beginning the election process. We might want to revise the role over time, but I feel like this revision process should happen separate from the election process and we should expect relatively small changes to the role each time around. Saying "define" suggests to me that we are throwing out the old description (which describes the job the current PDs are already doing) and starting from scratch on a description (which would likely end up being close to what we already had).

I definitely think it makes sense to review the role description though, like "we are looking for people who would be successful at doing the role as already defined."

Author: The way that I intended this was for people to read "define" when there isn't already a role description and "review" when there is one. 

Do you have alternative wording you feel would be more clear? If not I can try my hand at something.

Reviewer: I suppose since there already is a description, we can just remove "define"?

    * Aims
    * Time Investment
    * Responsibilities
    * Qualifications

>     * Term

Reviewer: Is this list not yet filled out? Otherwise I'm not sure I understand what this is communicating.

Author: This is intended to be a set of the required sections that the role description should cover, not something that gets filled out inline.

Reviewer: Can you make that explicit?

---
Review Role Description (https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3392#issuecomment-1505697944). A role description should contain the following content at a minimum:
- Aims
- Estimated Time Investment
- Responsibilities
- Qualifications
- Term
---
(As a side note, I find the term "aims" to be confusing. I've not seen it used before in this way and wondering if we can use goals instead much like the committee descriptions do?)

### Pre-Meeting Coordination

> * Gather nominations

Reviewer 2: It might be worth setting a minimum amount of time for nominations to be open. It'll be helpful this time, and also useful for planning for the next time we need to elect project directors. This time around I've been hoping we can give teams about a month to provide nominations, but I think a two week minimum would be sufficient.

Reviewer: A maximum would also be helpful (since one of the aims is to "Conduct the selection process in a time-efficient manner")

Author: could y'all suggest an edit? I'm not sure exactly how to phrase this

Reviewer 2: Here's a suggestion, but further edits are welcome. My goal here was to clarify how we'll know the process is started and how we'll communicate the start and end dates for the process. But it might sound a little too legalese-y...

```suggestion
* Gather nominations
    * The nomination process begins with an announcement from the facilitator chosen in the Setup phase. Council representatives should help publicize this announcement to their team as well.
    * The announcement will specify a date by which nominations must be submitted. This date will be no less than two weeks from the date the announcement goes out, and no more than four weeks.
```

    * Council representatives collaborate with their subteams to collect nominations on behalf of their branch of the organization tree.
    * Subteams can utilize any process they prefer, but we recommend following a similar approach to the process outlined in the "Election Meeting" section below

> * Share nominations publicly

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest that the teams share their nominations with the council via their representative, and then the council publishes the full set of nominations on a certain date.

There are two reasons for this:
1. It automatically gives us a centralized location to look for nominations. If each team is responsible for sharing their own nominations publicly, some might be in Zulip channels, others might be in random team repos, etc.
2. There's a dependency with scheduling, at it seems easier for the council to handle that. Basically, the council can either say "we want to have the election meeting on X, so we need to be sure to publish nominations by X-10" or "we just published the nominations, so we need to schedule the election meeting for at least ten days from now."

I think the end result is the same (nominations get published and people can give feedback) but there's less ambiguity in the process.

    * Each team representative must publicly share their team's nominations at least ten days before the final election meeting. This allows other teams to share feedback or objections about candidates their team didn't initially consider with their representative.
    * This 10-day period is equivalent to the Change Round in the "Election Meeting" step; representatives may change their nominations in advance of the meeting

> 

Reviewer: Do we require nominees to consent to be nominees? Seems like we should. It would be bad if someone nominated someone else without consulting them first.

Reviewer 2: I tend to think of all roles as having an implicit "the person wants to do the role" qualification, so it seems like deciding if a person is qualified would involve making sure they're willing to do it. Hopefully asking them would be implied, but it's probably better to be explicit somewhere rather than hoping.

Author: So I lean towards not necessarily asking for consent from the candidate until the very end based on this reasoning from https://www.sociocracyforall.org/selection-process/

> **Why don’t we just let people volunteer?**
> 
> Whenever we teach this process, there is someone in the group that asks “Why did we never ask whether that person wants to do that role?” How can we talk about them serving in a role if we don’t know whether they are available and willing?
> 
> The short answer is: we don’t have to. They are part of the process and the decision is made by [consent](https://www.sociocracyforall.org/consent-decision-making). They cannot be forced into a role. So there is no harm in this process but instead a lot of advantages. Asking for willingness at the beginning of the process would reduce our options and would change the energy during the process. We encourage facilitators to remind the group before every election to abstain from making assumptions about people’s willingness or availability.

Reviewer: I'm fine with this approach, but I would like for us to explicitly state that.

> ### Election Meeting

Reviewer: Is it actually mentioned anywhere who is participating in this meeting?

Reviewer: I would put it directly below this heading:

> The election meeting is compromised of all members of the Leadership Council who will actively participate in the consensus process as well as the facilitator who will facilitate that process.

This also makes me think that we explicitly don't want the facilitator to be a Council Member to avoid someone having to split their mental capacity across two tasks.

> * Share nominations

Reviewer 2: I realized, at least in the way I'm envisioning the process, we have a bit of ambiguity now behind what counts as a nomination.

In the Pre-meeting Coordination step, I imagined each team would nominate some number of candidates (preferably equal to the number of open Project Director seats, but the number could be smaller or larger, or even zero). Then we union all these candidates together to get a pool of candidates.

Then in the Election Meeting, the council members draw from the pool of candidates to propose a set of candidates equal in size to the number of open seats, and those would be the new Project Directors if the proposal is consented to.

I don't know if that distinction makes sense how I've described it? Maybe it is simpler if the "type" of the thing produced at the end of each phase is the same (meaning Teams would nominate a set of Project Directors as a unit, rather than a set of people they feel would be qualified for the role).

Author: I feel that ambiguity doesn't pose a risk to the process. I feel like we're at the point of having a lot of redundancy in this process, so if we aggregate the nominations into a pool and recreate sets vs. starting with sets and then possibly changing them in the change round, it all feels like it's gonna produce similarly high quality outputs.

Reviewer 2: Maybe being explicit that all candidates are pooled at the start of the Election Meeting wouldn't hurt. I agree that the ambiguity doesn't necessarily hurt anyway, but it could lead to teams feeling more constrained. For example, if we have three open seats then in the Pre-meeting Coordination phase a team might only have one candidate they can think of to nominate and feel like they can't make the nomination unless they have exactly three. I would think nominating one would be good, especially if they nominate someone who wasn't otherwise considered, and nominating four would be fine too, especially because that could help if we get constrained by affiliation limits.

```suggestion
* Share nominations. Nominations from all teams will be pooled together. In other words, teams do not have to nominate a set of directors as a whole. They may nominated any number of potential directors and the Council will select from the pool a number of directors equal to the number of open seats.
```

    * Write down nominations first[^1].

>     * Use a round format (e.g. [round format](https://www.sociocracyforall.org/on-rounds/))

Reviewer: Do we want to be *this* prescriptive? Perhaps we can just say:

> Gather feedback from all participants (e.g., by using a [round format](https://www.sociocracyforall.org/on-rounds/)).

Author: I feel the need to pause and acknowledge that I'm experiencing a strong preference here, and it's influencing my reasoning/response here:

I feel strongly that we should be prescriptive just so there's clarity and not many additional decisions that need to be made during the process, with the expectation that we can always change the process based on experience. I'd rather a facilitator doing this process who prefers to use a different approach to rounds to give concrete reasoning for why it should be changed and explain where their feeling is coming from and what needs they feel like rounds wouldn't meet.

I know this is coming from a place of strongly believing in rounds, having struggled to participate in unstructured discussions, and worrying about having a facilitator who prefers unstructured discussions. I feel like such a change would make it so people like myself would struggle more to participate in the discussion, and I don't want that decision to be up to the facilitator alone.

Reviewer: I'm just worried that people aren't necessarily familiar with a "round format" as a term of art. If we're feeling that there are properties we'd like out of the round format, we may wish to list those desired properties instead. I'd be fine keeping the link to a round format as an example of process that fulfills all the requirements.

    * Nominations must include supporting reasoning 
* Change Round

>     * During the change round, every team member will say who they nominate now and share reasons for their change if that applies.

Reviewer 2: (Assuming we go with batch selection) do we want to emphasize that "who" means the set of new Project Directors rather than an individual?

Reviewer: +1 it is ambiguous whether there is a 1 to 1 or a 1 to many correspondence between meeting participants and nominees. Can a meeting participant have many nominees? Should they be striving to nominate a list that would fill all open slots? Can they nominate more than the number of open slots?

* Facilitator proposes a candidate:
    * Based on gathered data, the facilitator suggests a candidate they believe will receive the group's consent.
* Seek objections to the facilitator's proposal
* Finalize the selection:
    * Discuss and attempt to resolve any objections, if possible.
    * Consent has been reached if the proposed choice has no remaining objections! :tada:
    * If objections persist and the current proposal reaches an impasse, the facilitator should make a new proposal based on the discussion and feedback received.
    * Continue seeking consensus and addressing objections until a satisfactory candidate is selected.
        * Note that this process seeks to produce a candidate everyone is satisfied with and has no objections to. Avoid lengthy debates over preferences not related to objections or unmet requirements.

> * Document and announce the selection

Reviewer: I believe once consensus is reached, we should hold a formal vote. There are compliance reasons to ensure that the final process be a vote.

Author: not opposed, tho I don't want to include that until we've confirmed it is necessary for compliance, cc @abibroom

Author: Given how the plan is to have Abi run the draft by legal council once we consent to sharing it with the leadership council for review, I am going to leave this comment unresolved with the understanding that this is non-blocking for the initial consent round and that it is only a blocker for the leadership council consent round.

Reviewer: Going to resolve this for now.

> 

Reviewer: Do we need a stalemate contingency plan? I get that we foresee that being highly unlikely especially in a high trust environment, and I'm absolutely fine with it only being a last resort, but it's not impossible and I'd rather have some sort of process that is 100% guaranteed to produce a result instead of *gestures to a governance crisis*.

Author: I don't feel like we're risking a governance crisis if we don't select new project directors quickly enough, we'll just extend our terms again (narrator voice: I do not want this). I'm not opposed to the idea of a stalemate contingency plan, so feel free to suggest a plan if you have one in mind, but I don't feel like this is something we will need, and if we do need it, I figure we will still be able to add it later without coming anywhere near a crisis.

Reviewer: I do worry that we might be in a situation where we cannot reach a consensus on a set of candidates and that there are hard objections to enough candidates as to make it impossible to fill a seat. What happens then?

Author: > I do worry that we might be in a situation where we cannot reach a consensus on a set of candidates and that there are hard objections to enough candidates as to make it impossible to fill a seat. What happens then?

I think we'd just keep trying or come up with an alternative approach if this one proves ineffective; that said, I feel that's unlikely to occur, given how many ways we have to help us reach a consensus[^1]. I'd rather encounter such a scenario and come up with solutions based on concrete experience rather than trying to defend against hypothetical concerns.

[^1]: What are those objections? Are they based on preference, or are they based on the role description and the established shared goals? Are they resolvable? Can we measure the concern? Can we shorten the term? etc, etc, etc

Reviewer 2: @rylev - Do you have any more thoughts here?

I think this not getting a consensus is unlikely enough that I'm fine with not stating anything, but it may not hurt to say something since we're talking about it.

I can think of a couple of stalemate contingency plans:

1. The board votes to extend terms and we repeat the process from scratch. We probably need to say something like "none of the candidates put forward were acceptable, so choose all new people when putting forward nominations." I'm not sure what to do if say we needed three people, we were able to reach consensus on two, but there was no acceptable candidate for the third. Maybe we keep the two we agreed on and re-run the selection process for just the one open seat? At any rate, I think if we go down this path, it's likely we won't solicit enough nominations to be successful the second time around.
2. The Council puts forward their own nominations that would be acceptable. This probably keeps things more time efficient and hopefully avoids repeating the stalemate, but it's also less significant. If we go this path, when we announce the results we'd definitely owe some kind of explanation for why the person we selected was not in the original set. I guess this route also doesn't give the project a chance to raise objections for the new candidates the council nominates on their own.
3. Just say "if a stalemate occurs, the council will create another Project Director Election Committee to revise the process so we can try again." We'd probably also vote to extend terms here as well.

If we want to say anything, I like option 3. It keeps us from having undefined behavior in the process, but it also means we don't have to attempt to solve unknown problems without sufficient information just yet.

Reviewer 4: I'll weigh in and say that my worry is much more about not finding enough people willing and able (time commitment) to do this work -- rather than us not being able to agree to a slate of nominees. Even with a partial rotation every ~1-2 years, we still end up needing to pick a pretty large number of people and a group with harsher restrictions than the council on corporate affiliation (IIRC, no more than 1, assuming it's for a company with a member on the board directly).

I'm personally happy with this proposal as the first attempt and I think *if* there is a contingency of some kind needed, I don't know that we gain much by trying to decide on it now vs. after we need it. If anything, I might add an explicit disclaimer to any documentation we put out about this that we're trying something new here and we'll re-evaluate depending on the results how much people liked the process and whether it was successful.

Reviewer 2: I added some text in 2984a52c0f5cc19264f7e52e4114ed87d72cdda0 that hopefully resolves this. Please mark the conversation as resolved if you're happy with it.

# Project Director Election Process

## Goals

The purpose of this policy is to outline a clear and efficient process for electing new Project Directors to represent the Rust project on the board of the Rust Foundation. The process aims to achieve the following goals:

> * Select candidates who fulfill the outlined candidate criteria in the [role description document](TODO: link), focusing on shared power and new leadership rather than solely prioritizing the best candidate.

Reviewer: "Shared power" might need some explanation as I don't think its obvious what this means. I would offer some wording, but I'm not sure I understand what is meant.

>     * Strive for tolerance and inclusivity, aiming for the overlap of tolerance rather than the overlap of preference. In other words, we want to prioritize a selection that everyone can accept over selecting anyone's first choice.

Reviewer: IMO the following says the same thing while being more concise:

```suggestion
    * Strive for tolerance and inclusivity by prioritizing selecting candidates that everyone can accept over selecting a subset of people's first choice.
```

* Conduct the selection process in a time-efficient manner.
* Incorporate input from a wide range of stakeholders across the entire Rust project.
* Ensure a diverse pool of qualified candidates for selection.
* Create a psychologically safe environment that values minority perspectives and encourages positive feedback, encouragement, and tolerance rather than preference or criticism.
* Ensure participants feel positive about their interactions and the execution of the process.
* Ensure the process is compliant with Rust Foundation bylaws and by extension Delaware corporation law.

## Description

### Setup

* The council selects a facilitator by consent:
    * Any team member can suggest a facilitator or volunteer themselves.
    * The facilitator must not be a nominee in the election and must be someone everyone trusts to set aside personal preferences during the election process.
    * **Goals of the facilitator role**
        * Clearly documenting and communicating the process and announcing and supporting its execution.
        * Tracking, reviewing, and documenting the effectiveness of the process.

> * Review Role Description ([example](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3392#issuecomment-1505697944)). The role description must contain the following content at a minimum:

Reviewer: I'm confused. I believe this used to be "Create and review" but it was changed to just "review" because the Foundation staff had already created a role description. However, that role description doesn't seem to be linked anywhere. Can we link to it? 

If we've decided that we actually don't want to automatically use that role description, than can the start of this line be reverted to "Create and review"?

Author: I think we'll need to modify the role description to include some additional detail, but otherwise I think we should leave it as simply "review" on the expectation that we will have a role description alongside this document. I'm going to take the existing role description and convert it to a markdown document, pull it into this PR, then start expanding on it.

Reviewer 3: Noting that it isn't, at present, a _Project Director_ role description, it's a _Rust Foundation Board Director_ role description - which is to say, it applies to Member Directors as well. By all means create an addendum for expectations of Project Directors specifically, but be wary of making changes to the main role description unless those changes would also apply smoothly to a Member Director carrying out their role on the board.

Author: aah that's a good point. In that case I'll setup a Project Director specific role description and plan on linking to the general board director role and responsibilities document

    * Goals
    * Time Investment
    * Responsibilities
    * Qualifications
    * Term

### Pre-Meeting Coordination

* Gather nominations

>     * The nomination process begins with an announcement from the facilitator chosen in the Setup phase. Council representatives should help publicize this announcement to their team as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * The nomination process begins with an announcement from the facilitator chosen in the Setup phase. Council representatives should help publicize this announcement to their teams as well.
```

    * The announcement will specify a date by which nominations must be submitted. This date will be no less than two weeks from the date the announcement goes out, and no more than four weeks.

>     * Council representatives collaborate with their subteams to collect nominations on behalf of their branch of the organization tree.

Reviewer: I do believe we want this limitation at a minimum:

```suggestion
    * Council representatives collaborate with their subteams to collect nominations on behalf of their branch of the organization tree.
      * Nominations do not have to be members of the Council representative's respective team but must be project members. 
```

Reviewer 2: I suppose we could immediately make someone a project member if we wanted them to be a Project Director, although I'm not sure which team we'd use for that. Launching Pad or a subcommittee of the Council could work, but I'm not sure either is a good idea.

    * Subteams can utilize any process they prefer, but we recommend following a similar approach to the process outlined in the "Election Meeting" section below

>     * The facilitator may a minimum or maximum time period 

Reviewer: I think this was missing a word? However, this seems to be redundant as previously it was stated that the date for submission shall be set at least two weeks and at most 4 weeks from announcement.

```suggestion
    * The facilitator may specify a minimum or maximum time period 
```

> * Share nominations (*Nominations from all teams will be pooled together. In other words, teams do not have to nominate a set of directors as a whole. They may nominated any number of potential directors and the Council will select from the pool a number of directors equal to the number of open seats.*)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Share nominations (*Nominations from all teams will be pooled together. In other words, teams do not have to nominate a set of directors as a whole. They may nominate any number of potential directors and the Council will select from the pool a number of directors equal to the number of open seats.*)
```

* Select candidates who fulfill the outlined candidate criteria in the [role description document](TODO: link), focusing on shared power and new leadership rather than solely prioritizing the best candidate.
    * Strive for tolerance and inclusivity by prioritizing selecting candidates that everyone can accept over selecting a subset of people's first choice.
* Conduct the selection process in a time-efficient manner.
* Incorporate input from a wide range of stakeholders across the entire Rust project.
* Ensure a diverse pool of qualified candidates for selection.
* Create a psychologically safe environment that values minority perspectives and encourages positive feedback, encouragement, and tolerance rather than preference or criticism.
* Ensure participants feel positive about their interactions and the execution of the process.
* Ensure the process is compliant with Rust Foundation bylaws and by extension Delaware corporation law.

## Description

### Setup

* The council selects a facilitator by consent:
    * Any team member can suggest a facilitator or volunteer themselves.

>     * The facilitator must not be a nominee in the election and must be someone everyone trusts to set aside personal preferences during the election process.

Author: I personally would not want to limit that. I'm going off of my own experience here, but I'm imagining if I were the facilitator I would not struggle to facilitate and participate, the hardest part would probably be holding the position with care, especially if I'm the one who ends up making the final proposal based on all the nomination and change round information, but I'd encourage others on the team to make a proposal before jumping in with my own if all I get is silence, and trust that if people felt like I just ignored the feedback and went with my own preference that they would raise that feedback either immediately or during the check-out.

* Select candidates who fulfill the outlined candidate criteria in the [role description document](TODO: link), focusing on new leadership and diverse perspectives rather than solely prioritizing the best candidate.
    * Strive for tolerance and inclusivity by prioritizing selecting candidates that everyone can accept over selecting a subset of people's first choice.
* Conduct the selection process in a time-efficient manner.
* Incorporate input from a wide range of stakeholders across the entire Rust project.
* Ensure a diverse pool of qualified candidates for selection.
* Create a psychologically safe environment that values minority perspectives and encourages positive feedback, encouragement, and tolerance rather than preference or criticism.
* Ensure participants feel positive about their interactions and the execution of the process.
* Ensure the process is compliant with Rust Foundation bylaws and by extension Delaware corporation law.

## Description

### Setup

* The council selects a facilitator by consent:
    * Any team member can suggest a facilitator or volunteer themselves.

>     * The facilitator must not be a nominee in the election and must be someone everyone trusts to set aside personal preferences during the election process.

Reviewer 4: It's not super clear to me who "everyone" here is and what we use as a signal. Maybe at least limiting to project members?

Author: I was assuming this meant "the council", though presumably if someone on a team objected they'd tell their council member and they'd be able to bring that input back to the rest of the council

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * The facilitator must not be a nominee in the election and must be someone the council trusts to set aside personal preferences during the election process.
```

I think this makes me feel better -- in particular, unbounded sets of people on something nebulous like trust is always makes me nervous :)

    * Each team representative must share their team's nominations and the reasoning for their nominations with the council's selected facilitator.
    * The facilitator must publicly share the pool of all nominations and reasonings at least ten days before the final election meeting.
        * This allows other teams to share feedback or objections about candidates their team didn't initially consider with their representative.
    * This 10-day period is equivalent to the Change Round in the "Election Meeting" step; representatives may change their nominations in advance of the meeting, this does not require restarting the 10-day period.

### Election Meeting

The election meeting is compromised of all members of the Leadership Council who will actively participate in the consensus process as well as the facilitator who will facilitate that process.

* Share nominations
    * Write down nominations first[^1].
    * Use a round format[^2] (e.g. [round format](https://www.sociocracyforall.org/on-rounds/))
    * Nominations must include supporting reasoning 
* Change Round

>     * During the change round, every team member will share their set of nominees and the reasons for their change if that applies.

Reviewer 4: It's not super clear to me what exactly is changing here - are council members withdrawing nominations? Altering reasons for/against? Withdrawing would seem odd to me given that the nomination was made by other people (potentially) and they're not here to hear arguments. Maybe we say that the arguments should be enough to decide in combination with the list of reasons for provided already, not sure...

Author: The idea here is to make room for people to change their minds based on the feedback they hear in the initial nomination round and to communicate how the information has influenced their disposition. At this point, you haven't made any proposal yet, so changing your set of nominees from one set of people to another doesn't inherently withdraw the prior set from consideration, if for whatever reason someone changed off of someone but everyone else changed too that person the final proposal could still be that person, or even if nobody changed to them and they weren't mentioned in the final round, though that would be strange and I would be really interested to hear the reasoning behind such a final proposal.

Reviewer 4: > change their minds [...] made any proposal yet

I guess this is why I'm confused -- what are you changing your mind *on*? My impression is that we go in a round, say "hey, Joe would be great, they are involved in multiple parts of the project and are able to bridge gaps in understanding between folks coming from outside the project and inside".

Is the intent there that we're *also* saying something like "And I think Joe is better than Bob" in this round? And *that* ranking/choice is what is changing in the change round?

Author: Yeah, I think ultimately what the nomination + change rounds is to gather as much and as diverse of information as possible, this is also why we ask people to write down their nominations before hearing everyone talk, we want to hear your original perspective not have you go along with the group energy, because your idea might actually be a really unique and good one that nobody else considered. The change round is supposed to be a way to acknowledge that you received new information that has changed your mind. Maybe someone else's nomination mentioned that SoandSo actually has some amazing experience that's super relevant and you find that reasoning super compelling. In the change round you could acknowledge that and say "I'm changing my nomination to SoandSo because I forgot they're taking SuperRelevantTraining for roles just like this and I think this would be a perfect opportunity for them and the project to use and further practice those skills."

Reviewer 4: I think this makes sense. Maybe the way to frame this is that the initial round is not *nominating* (which it sounds like you should really just do one person, if you switch to a single person in change round) and instead you list the *multiple* nominations your team made and reasons for (perhaps this is a "facilitator collects prior to the meeting?" - not clear why this is a sync round). Then we go through that list in rounds selecting the candidate each person believes is best and why they are best (vs. why they are good candidates) in the change rounds.

Does that roughly match your expectations, or am I missing some key elements? Mostly trying to repeat back my understanding rather than suggesting we make changes at this point - want to understand before (if) I ask for changes :)

Author: I really appreciate you looping it back for me, it's extremely helpful. I think there's still a disconnect for us to work out but we're making good progress.

> Maybe the way to frame this is that the initial round is not nominating and instead you list the multiple nominations your team made and reasons for.

So I think this accurately describes the current plan for the  [pre-meeting coordination](https://github.com/yaahc/leadership-council/blob/project-director-election-proposal/policies/project-director-election-process.md#pre-meeting-coordination) step. The teams first create a set of nominations that are then shared publicly with the other teams and representatives and hopefully reviewed prior to the meeting[^1]. The plan is to enter the meeting with a bunch of information from the pool of nominations and reasons from all the teams, plus a bunch of representatives who have participated in mini versions of the process with their subteams. Then the nomination round would have each representative suggest an exact set they'd propose based on the information they have available to them. The initial nomination the representatives make in the first round should include one name for each open position. It may be a subset of the nominations from their team, or it may utilize nominations from other teams if their reasons were compelling or if their original team didn't nominate enough people. Then you do the change round and the opportunity to tweak parts of what is essentially your own mini proposal based on the new information.

Hopefully, this helps. I think part of the confusion might be that I'm basing this proposal on a process designed to be fast and self-contained for things like filling roles within a team of people, not organization-wide decisions involving many teams recursively. I think we might have a little redundancy in the process, so it may end up being that the initial nomination round ends up functioning more like the change round of the async nomination round and that the change round in the election meeting itself is unnecessary. I'm hoping having extra rounds to speak where there's nothing to say is the safer failure mode and so I'm favoring redundancy, but I wouldn't be surprised if we further tweak the proposal after trying it out.

[^1]: And this is the part where I'm thinking maybe having the initial round be for listing the nominations and reasons in the pool is probably a good idea, but that's making me think three rounds, not two. Nomination pool sharing round, nomination proposal round (precise set of nominees based on open positions), proposal change round, final proposal + consent round (four rounds actually).

Reviewer 4: Okay, I think we're generally on the same page on how this should work, now I'll need to spend some time rereading the text itself to make sure it aligns with my newfound understanding :)

# Project Director Election Process

## Goals

The purpose of this policy is to outline a clear and efficient process for electing new Project Directors to represent the Rust project on the board of the Rust Foundation. The process aims to achieve the following goals:

> * Select candidates who fulfill the outlined candidate criteria in the [role description document](TODO: link), focusing on new leadership and diverse perspectives rather than solely prioritizing the best candidate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Select candidates who fulfill the outlined candidate criteria in the [role description document](../roles/rust-foundation-project-director.md), focusing on new leadership and diverse perspectives rather than solely prioritizing the best candidate.
```

    * Strive for tolerance and inclusivity by prioritizing selecting candidates that everyone can accept over selecting a subset of people's first choice.
* Conduct the selection process in a time-efficient manner.
* Incorporate input from a wide range of stakeholders across the entire Rust project.
* Ensure a diverse pool of qualified candidates for selection.
* Create a psychologically safe environment that values minority perspectives and encourages positive feedback, encouragement, and tolerance rather than preference or criticism.
* Ensure participants feel positive about their interactions and the execution of the process.
* Ensure the process is compliant with Rust Foundation bylaws and by extension Delaware corporation law.

## Description

### Setup

* The council selects a facilitator by consent:
    * Any team member can suggest a facilitator or volunteer themselves.

>     * The facilitator must not be a nominee in the election and must be someone the council trusts to set aside personal preferences during the election process.

Author: I don't see a reason to put restrictions on who can be a facilitator beyond that they can be effective in the role, I think that + people being able to raise objections should be enough. If someone on the council thinks another council member couldn't facilitate due to them being on the council and had a reason to back that up I figure that should be enough to navigate any issues.

>     * The facilitator must not be a nominee in the election and must be someone the council trusts to set aside personal preferences during the election process.

Reviewer 2: I had actually assumed the facilitator _would_ be a member of the Council, although I guess they don't have to be.

>     * The facilitator must not be a nominee in the election and must be someone the council trusts to set aside personal preferences during the election process.

Reviewer: Ok this sounds like something we can clear up in subsequent iterations if it turns out to be an issue.

    * **Goals of the facilitator role**
        * Clearly documenting and communicating the process and announcing and supporting its execution.
        * Tracking, reviewing, and documenting the effectiveness of the process.
* Review Role Description ([example](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3392#issuecomment-1505697944)). The role description must contain the following content at a minimum:
    * Goals
    * Time Investment
    * Responsibilities
    * Qualifications
    * Term

### Pre-Meeting Coordination

* Gather nominations

>     * The nomination process begins with an announcement from the facilitator chosen in the Setup phase. Council representatives should help publicize this announcement to their teams as well.

Reviewer 2: I feel like that's implied in the way this is already worded. Do you have a suggestion for how to make it more explicit?

>     * The nomination process begins with an announcement from the facilitator chosen in the Setup phase. Council representatives should help publicize this announcement to their teams as well.

Reviewer: I think this would resolve my nit:

```suggestion
    * The nomination process begins with a public announcement made on public communication channels from the facilitator chosen in the Setup phase. Council representatives should help publicize this announcement to their teams as well.
```

>     * The nomination process begins with an announcement from the facilitator chosen in the Setup phase. Council representatives should help publicize this announcement to their teams as well.

Reviewer 2: Does a public Zulip stream count as a public communication channel?

    * The announcement will specify a date by which nominations must be submitted. This date will be no less than two weeks from the date the announcement goes out, and no more than four weeks.
    * Council representatives collaborate with their subteams to collect nominations on behalf of their branch of the organization tree.
      * Nominations do not have to be members of the Council representative's respective team but must be project members.
    * Subteams can utilize any process they prefer, but we recommend following a similar approach to the process outlined in the "Election Meeting" section below
    * The facilitator may specify a minimum or maximum time period
* Share nominations
    * *Nominations from all teams will be pooled together. In other words, teams do not have to nominate a set of directors as a whole. They may nominate any number of potential directors and the Council will select from the pool a number of directors equal to the number of open seats.*

>     * Each team representative must share their team's nominations and the reasoning for their nominations first with the candidates, and then, for those candidates who consent to be nominated, with the council's selected facilitator.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * Each team representative must share their team's nominations and the reasoning for their nominations first with the candidates being nominated, and then, for those candidates who consent to be nominated, with the council's selected facilitator.
```

nit: added for emphasis, because I missed this on first read

    * The facilitator must publicly share the pool of all nominations and reasonings at least ten days before the final election meeting.
        * This allows other teams to share feedback or objections about candidates their team didn't initially consider with their representative.
    * This 10-day period is equivalent to the Change Round in the "Election Meeting" step; representatives may change their nominations in advance of the meeting, this does not require restarting the 10-day period.

### Election Meeting

The election meeting is compromised of all members of the Leadership Council who will actively participate in the consensus process as well as the facilitator who will facilitate that process.

* Share nominations
    * Write down nominations first[^1].
    * Use a round format[^2] (e.g. [round format](https://www.sociocracyforall.org/on-rounds/))
    * Nominations must include supporting reasoning 
* Change Round

>     * During the change round, every team member will share their set of nominees and the reasons for their change if that applies.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * During the change round, every team member will share their current preferred nominees and the reasons for changes from the previous preferred nominees if that applies.
    * Note that the change round is driving around discussing and trying to select the best possible nominee(s) rather than discussing the full set of nominees. Council members are *not* de-selecting a nominee from consideration by not picking their name during the change round as their preferred choice.
```

@yaahc I think this helps reflect the discussion we had in the comment thread just above.

* Facilitator proposes a candidate:
    * Based on gathered data, the facilitator suggests a candidate they believe will receive the group's consent.
* Seek objections to the facilitator's proposal
* Finalize the selection:
    * Discuss and attempt to resolve any objections, if possible.
    * Consent has been reached if the proposed choice has no remaining objections! :tada:
    * If objections persist and the current proposal reaches an impasse, the facilitator should make a new proposal based on the discussion and feedback received.
    * Continue seeking consensus and addressing objections until a satisfactory candidate is selected.
        * Note that this process seeks to produce a candidate everyone is satisfied with and has no objections to. Avoid lengthy debates over preferences not related to objections or unmet requirements.
* Document and announce the selection

### FAQ

#### Why is there no step where we require that people consent to be nominated?

> One of the goals of this policy is to create opportunities for new leadership. We want to create an environment that encourages people to step up into power. Sometimes the confidence and faith of a group can give people the confidence they need to consent to being selected. Candidates can always object to accepting a role, but we save that step for last to try to filter out as few candidates as possible who would otherwise have objected prior to hearing all the reasons people have confidence in them.

Reviewer 5: I think this should reference that candidates have an opportunity to object before the election meeting.

Author: Tried to resolve this in https://github.com/rust-lang/leadership-council/pull/12/commits/75b454c9a7713a873c163ff40953627cdea40389; it's a bit more subtle than just mentioning the election meeting straight up. Instead, I mentioned having the chance to object before public nomination, which is the same thing. If you'd prefer it to be more explicit, please suggest alternative wording; this was the best I could do.

# Project Director Election Process

## Goals

The purpose of this policy is to outline a clear and efficient process for electing new Project Directors to represent the Rust project on the board of the Rust Foundation. The process aims to achieve the following goals:

* Select candidates who fulfill the outlined candidate criteria in the [role description document](../roles/rust-foundation-project-director.md), focusing on new leadership and diverse perspectives rather than solely prioritizing the best candidate.
    * Strive for tolerance and inclusivity by prioritizing selecting candidates that everyone can accept over selecting the first choice for only a subset of people.
* Conduct the selection process in a time-efficient manner.
* Incorporate input from a wide range of stakeholders across the entire Rust project.
* Ensure a diverse pool of qualified candidates for selection.

> * Create a psychologically safe environment that values minority perspectives and encourages positive feedback, encouragement, and tolerance rather than preference or criticism.

Reviewer: Nit: we actually talk about preference a lot in this document. Perhaps @yaahc can make it clearer what is meant here. Perhaps this captures it:

```suggestion
* Create a psychologically safe environment that values minority perspectives and encourages positive feedback, encouragement, and tolerance rather than personal preference or criticism.
```

    * The facilitator must publicly share the pool of all nominations and reasonings at least ten days before the final election meeting.
        * This allows other teams to share feedback or objections about candidates their team didn't initially consider with their representative.
    * This 10-day period is equivalent to the Change Round in the "Election Meeting" step; representatives may change their nominations in advance of the meeting, this does not require restarting the 10-day period.

### Election Meeting

The election meeting is compromised of all members of the Leadership Council who will actively participate in the consensus process as well as the facilitator who will facilitate that process.

* Share nominations
    * Write down nominations first[^1].
    * Use a round format[^2] (e.g. [round format](https://www.sociocracyforall.org/on-rounds/))
    * Nominations must include supporting reasoning 
* Change Round
    * During the change round, every team member will share their current preferred nominees and the reasons for changes from the previous preferred nominees if that applies.

>     * Note that the change round is driving around discussing and trying to select the best possible nominee(s) rather than discussing the full set of nominees. Council members are *not* de-selecting a nominee from consideration by not picking their name during the change round as their preferred choice.

Reviewer: > Council members are *not* de-selecting a nominee from consideration by not picking their name during the change round as their preferred choice.

What is this trying to say? I'm not sure what I'm supposed to take away from this sentence.

Reviewer 4: This is saying that if in round 2 no one says Bob, round 3 can still have Bob "come back".

Reviewer 4: Sounds ok to me.

Reviewer 2: I'll apply Ryan's suggestion.

    * The facilitator may specify a minimum or maximum time period
* Share nominations
    * *Nominations from all teams will be pooled together. In other words, teams do not have to nominate a set of directors as a whole. They may nominate any number of potential directors and the Council will select from the pool a number of directors equal to the number of open seats.*
    * Each team representative must share their team's nominations and the reasoning for their nominations first with the candidates being nominated, and then, for those candidates who consent to be nominated, with the council's selected facilitator.
    * The facilitator must publicly share the pool of all nominations and reasonings at least ten days before the final election meeting.
        * This allows other teams to share feedback or objections about candidates their team didn't initially consider with their representative.
    * This 10-day period is equivalent to the Change Round in the "Election Meeting" step; representatives may change their nominations in advance of the meeting, this does not require restarting the 10-day period.

### Election Meeting

> The election meeting is compromised of all members of the Leadership Council who will actively participate in the consensus process as well as the facilitator who will facilitate that process.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The election meeting is comprised of all members of the Leadership Council who will actively participate in the consensus process as well as the facilitator who will facilitate that process.
```

    * Continue seeking consensus and addressing objections until a satisfactory candidate is selected.
        * Note that this process seeks to produce a candidate everyone is satisfied with and has no objections to. Avoid lengthy debates over preferences not related to objections or unmet requirements.
* Document and announce the selection

If for some reason the Council is unable to reach consensus on a group of
candidates (for example, the Council finds blocking objections to all
candidates), the Council will postpone the election process to give a chance to
troubleshoot and find an approach that is more likely to be successful. We do
not specify how this will happen, but the council would likely convene a
subcommittee to work on the issue and report back to the council.

### Conflicts of Interest

The Council will follow the policies defined in the [Leadership Council
RFC][rfc3392] for handling conflicts of interest. One potential source of
conflicts of interest is if a Council member is nominated as a candidate for the
Project Director role.

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

[rfc3392]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3392-leadership-council.html
```

    * Nominations must include supporting reasoning 
* Change Round
    * During the change round, every team member will share their current preferred nominees and the reasons for changes from the previous preferred nominees if that applies.
    * Note that the change round is driving around discussing and trying to select the best possible nominee(s) rather than discussing the full set of nominees. De-selecting a nominee from consideration in a given change round does not disqualify the nominee from being selected in future change rounds.
* Facilitator proposes a candidate:
    * Based on gathered data, the facilitator suggests a candidate they believe will receive the group's consent.
* Seek objections to the facilitator's proposal
* Finalize the selection:
    * Discuss and attempt to resolve any objections, if possible.
    * Consent has been reached if the proposed choice has no remaining objections! :tada:
    * If objections persist and the current proposal reaches an impasse, the facilitator should make a new proposal based on the discussion and feedback received.
    * Continue seeking consensus and addressing objections until a satisfactory candidate is selected.

>         * Note that this process seeks to produce a candidate everyone is satisfied with and has no objections to. Avoid lengthy debates over preferences not related to objections or unmet requirements.
> * Document and announce the selection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * Note that this process seeks to produce a candidate everyone is satisfied with and has no objections to. Avoid lengthy debates over preferences not related to objections or unmet requirements.
* At this point, the Council will conduct a vote of the members of the council to ratify the selection through an election.
* Document and announce the selection
```

@rylev, @Mark-Simulacrum - Does this addition look sufficient to address to legal questions around needing a formal election?

Reviewer 3: @eholk - @rylev and @Mark-Simulacrum have some wording that has been approved by Foundation's legal council.

Reviewer 2: I added the edits from legal last week, so I'll mark this as resolved.

If for some reason the Council is unable to reach consensus on a group of
candidates (for example, the Council finds blocking objections to all
candidates), the Council will postpone the election process to give a chance to
troubleshoot and find an approach that is more likely to be successful. We do
not specify how this will happen, but the council would likely convene a
subcommittee to work on the issue and report back to the council.

### Conflicts of Interest

The Council will follow the policies defined in the [Leadership Council
RFC][rfc3392] for handling conflicts of interest. One potential source of
conflicts of interest is if a Council member is nominated as a candidate for the
Project Director role.

[rfc3392]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3392-leadership-council.html
### FAQ

> #### Why is there no step where we require that people consent to be nominated?

Reviewer 7: I'm confused about this section-- I thought [here](https://github.com/rust-lang/leadership-council/pull/12/files#diff-2556c5baab015a9c1c52a85c3b378a6a7f57bb50be65ff0111342c96bcc7c3ffR44) was the step where we require that people consent to be nominated:

> * Each team representative must share their team's nominations and the reasoning for their nominations first with the candidates being nominated, and then, for those candidates who consent to be nominated, with the council's selected facilitator.

Reviewer: +1 to this being confusing. I believe the idea is that the person doesn't need to *initially* consent to a nomination. I believe we originally phrased this as they don't need to consent to being nominated *at all* and that consent comes at the point of accepting the role.
